Tutorial pt 1 - welcome to the terminal (#697)
canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation: docs/tutorial/welcome-to-the-terminal.md

(welcome-to-the-terminal)=
# Welcome to the terminal

On Ubuntu Server, the terminal is the primary way of interacting with your system.
It's easier to use than you might think, and learning it gives you much more control over your system (including on your Ubuntu Desktop).

In this tutorial, we'll use a virtual machine (VM) with Ubuntu Server to poke around and explore the terminal in a safe sandbox that won't affect your computer. You'll learn how to navigate your system, how to find and work with files, and where to find help if you get stuck.

## Prerequisites

* **Knowledge:**

  None! You don't even need to use an Ubuntu machine -- we will use Multipass to create a virtual Ubuntu environment to play with.

* **Hardware:**

  The Multipass virtual machine needs at least **5 GB of disk space**, and **1 GB of memory**.

> ## Install Multipass

Reviewer: Should we be using multipass in the tutorial for people already on Linux? Having linux users spin up the VM through LXD might be a better choice, though it is also simpler to just have a unified tutorial for all, so I don't have particularly strong feelings on this, just raising it for consideration.

Author: This tutorial is aimed at people who may have (potentially) never used either Linux or a virtual machine before. Multipass is arguably the easiest way for a complete beginner to access Ubuntu, particularly if they're coming from windows or mac. I'd rather have the same instruction for all three (rather than using LXD for Linux users, WSL for windows and Multipass for mac) just to ensure that the results the user sees are the same and predictable.

We're starting to get more tutorial content, so one option is if I make all the tutorials into a series, then we could split for "beginners" (multipass) and "intermediate" (LXD) and "advanced" (QEMU). WDYT?

Reviewer: Seems like a good idea, especially since once you actually get into the Linux container (wherever it may be) the tutorials are identical (since I don't think any tutorial level content will care if its virtualized). For now I think multipass alone is good, so I'm resolving this

In software documentation, you will often see instructions to "run" or "execute" a command (or a set of commands). What this means is: type the command into your terminal at the **shell prompt** and press {kbd}`Enter` on your keyboard. Let's try that out, and launch a new Multipass VM called "tutorial" with the following command:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: user
:host: computer
:dir: ~
multipass launch --name tutorial
```

The command is sent to the **shell**, which interprets the command and sends it to the operating system, which runs the command. It takes a little time for the `tutorial` instance to be created, but eventually the shell shows output like this:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: user
:host: computer
:dir: ~
multipass launch --name tutorial

Launched: tutorial
```

We've just successfully run our first command on the CLI!

### The shell

You may be wondering: "why we need a shell at all? Why can't we just tell the operating system what to do directly?"

> This is a good question. In short, it's because the hardware in our machines doesn't speak "human", and it's difficult and time consuming for us to try and speak "computer". So, we use the shell as a translation layer to convert what we want into precise **system calls** that the computer can understand. 

Reviewer 2: I do not believe in this to be a good explanation.
You can very much run all the CLI tools from the GUI.
try ALT+F2 which wil open "run a command" and you can ask it to run any CLI tool.

The problem is, where is its input, where its ouput?

Yes - the diff is that those tools do not have graphical input or output, they are text based and mostly perform one general function. More complex tools extend on that. Here you might want to refer to the very famouts and basic philosophy of https://harmful.cat-v.org/cat-v/unix_prog_design.pdf which has this statement

And then in turn what a shell is about IMHO is:
a) basic: providing a way to provide input and consume output of CLI programs
b) efficiency: no graphical handling often makes the tools more efficient and for the same reason servers often do not even have any GUI installed as it is a burden not needed there for operating services
c) the ability to issue multiple of them in the same context e.g. working dir
d) provide the ability to connect multiple of them to more capable function (via arguments, control structures like if/loops, subshells to create arguments for the next and pipes to connect them). All this in (d) follows here later or much later.

Author: Revised all three paragraphs, lmk if you think they're better

![shell](./images/shell.png)

> This makes computers much easier to work with, and it means we don't need to be fluent in binary code. Instead, we can learn commands, which are a sort of shorthand.

Reviewer 2: Again, this isn't what it is.
It is more about the fact that calling tools within control structures and combining them allows even simple tools to quickly outperform what even complex GUI applications can do. Think of the CLI as a set of building blocks (lego) while the GUI mostly has predetermined use cases (playmobil). If you are withint the predetermined use cases the GUI might be more comfortable but the CLI quickly gets more ppowerful as you can make it do what you need.

Example
- rename a file
  - GUI open file manager, right click rename
  - CLI `mv oldname newname`
  - they are about equal
- rename all files ending in .txt to prepend current time of day
  - GUI a lot of clicking and typing and more
  - `rename "s/^/$(date +%H%M)-/" *.txt` pulling in the date automatically, affecting all that match a patern and done

So much for a better explanation where they differ.
If you can find a non trademark example of lego/playmobil that is actually a good comparison

Author: Revised this

> In fact, Multipass *itself* is a shell. Instead of being a translation layer around our physical machine, it's a translation layer around the *virtual* machine we've just made. Let's access our virtual machine now by running this command:

Reviewer 2: "In fact, Multipass *itself* is a shell" - umm, very no :-)

Just drop the whole line I think.

Reviewer 2: Actually I now found what you want to say ...

Suggestion:

The virtual machine provided by multipass also comes without the burden of a GUI and hence the easy, general access it provides you to run commands on the shell is abstracting all the details of virtualization and allowing you to open a shell in running instance.

(and then follows the command multipass shell tutorial)

Author: Thanks - I think I oversimplified in the wrong direction.

 * Documentation:  https://help.ubuntu.com
 * Management:     https://landscape.canonical.com
 * Support:        https://ubuntu.com/pro

 System information as of Thu Apr 16 14:25:25 BST 2026

  System load:  0.09              Processes:             99
  Usage of /:   49.7% of 3.80GB   Users logged in:       0
  Memory usage: 20%               IPv4 address for ens3: 10.234.118.216
  Swap usage:   0%

Expanded Security Maintenance for Applications is not enabled.

51 updates can be applied immediately.
42 of these updates are standard security updates.
To see these additional updates run: apt list --upgradable

Enable ESM Apps to receive additional future security updates.
See https://ubuntu.com/esm or run: sudo pro status

To run a command as administrator (user "root"), use "sudo <command>".
See "man sudo_root" for details.
```

You've probably noticed that your shell prompt has changed, and now says `ubuntu@tutorial:~$` -- `tutorial` is the name of our virtual machine, and `ubuntu` is the default username in a Multipass virtual machine. This is how we know we're now playing in our virtual sandbox, and not in our physical computer.

### Other ways to use commands

> As we've now seen, commands are the instructions that we give the computer by typing them into the terminal. In our documentation, commands are `formatted like this`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we've now seen, CLI commands are calls to start executable binaries that we give the computer by typing them into the terminal. In our documentation, commands are `formatted like this`.
```

Author: I can't add the term "executable binaries" without explaining it. Do we want to add that level of detail in such a beginner level tutorial?

Sometimes, we might want to run a whole set of commands at once.

> For convenience, we can save them in a file called a **shell script**, in the order we want the computer to run them. Then, we just need to command the computer to run the script, and it runs the commands in the script by itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For convenience, we can save them in a file called a **shell script**, in the order we want the shell to execute them. Then, we just need to tell the shell to run the script, and it runs the commands in the script by itself.
```

Author: Done

As you become more familiar with the command line, you can also begin to define your own commands built from other commands. These are called **aliases**, and they can be very handy shortcuts for small sets of commands you want to run often.

> ## Navigating the filesystem

Reviewer 2: I now see the commands of the cheat sheet coming.
Should we link to it somewhere here to say "here are the details but you might use ... for later reference"?

Author: I probably won't add that here - otherwise we're distracting people while they're on the path we're setting out for them. I do agree we should have that link though, so I'll add it at the end of the page.

The **filesystem** is the structure your operating system uses to organize all files and directories on the computer. It's like the folder structure you see on a desktop computer's file manager, except we'll be navigating it using text commands in the CLI.

There are some CLI commands that are so useful, and that we'll use so often, they'll become baked into our memory. First, let's try this one:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls
```

Nothing happened, right?

The `ls` command ("list show") shows us a list of all the files in our current folder. This is a brand new virtual machine, though, and we haven't created anything yet, so there's nothing to show! Let's fix that by creating a few files using the `touch` command:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
touch my-first-file.txt my-second-file.txt my-third-file.txt
```

Now if we run `ls` again it should show them to us:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls

my-first-file.txt my-second-file.txt my-third-file.txt
```

> We can also create folders to help keep all our files organized using the `mkdir` command:

Reviewer 2: Globally - all those `commandname` should be ``` [`commandname`](link-to-manpage) ```

Author: I'd prefer not to do that in this tutorial - adding too many links in a tutorial environment can be a significant distraction at the best of times, but here we want to encourage them to play around in the CLI and that's why where I've suggested looking at manpages, that they use `man <cmd>` instead (and only after the command has been introduced and they've run it). I added manpage links to the reference cheatsheet, where I agree that it makes sense.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
mkdir my-folder
```

Let's run `ls` again:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls

my-first-file.txt my-folder my-second-file.txt my-third-file.txt
```

There is our new folder!

The `mkdir` command is short for "make directory". A directory is exactly the same as a folder, but it abbreviates to the conveniently short `dir` so it's used more often. We'll use them interchangeably.

Let's now move the three files we created into `my-folder`, so we can keep our current folder nice and tidy. We can do this using the `mv` command.

Since it doesn't know which files to move, we must give some **arguments** to the move (`mv`) command. Actually, we already did this with our `touch` and `mkdir` commands earlier:

```bash
touch FILE(S)

> touch <file-name> # Create one file

Reviewer 2: Somewhere above you explained the generic style e.g. `cmd` for commands.
Since this is beginner level I think there you need to explain that `<foo>` is a placeholder for something they add. Because in reality this is redirecting input and output.

Author: That's a great point. I've never been a fan of the "foo" "bar" paradigm, but it's so ubiquitous I probably ought to mention it.

Author: Added

```

You can move any number of files you want. The names of the files you want to move always come right after the `mv` command. The folder you want to move those files to is *always* at the end. That's to say, these are **positional arguments** -- the order of where they appear in the command is important.

If you have a lot of files to move, though, there's a handy shortcut.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
mv *.txt my-folder
``` 

The wildcard (`*`) symbol tells the `mv` command to look for *all files* whose name matches the pattern. In this case, files with *any* name, but ending with the `.txt` file extension. Let's check this did what we expected:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls

my-folder
```

Nice and tidy! But how do we know that the files have been moved, and not just deleted?

Here, we can use the `cd` command ("change directory"), to move to `my-folder` and take a peek inside:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
cd my-folder/
```
```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~/my-folder
ls

my-first-file.txt my-second-file.txt my-third-file.txt
```

> Did you notice how the shell prompt changed to `ubuntu@tutorial:~/my-folder$` after we used the `cd` command? This is our biggest navigation help! The tilde (`~`) symbol signifies our home directory, which was our starting point. This is often called the "root directory". All the directories and subdirectories we create can trace a path back to the root directory.

Reviewer: right now this reads to me as saying that `~` is called the root directory,  while most documentation will usually just call this `~` or "your home directory" or `$HOME` and explicitly only use "root" to refer to the entire filesystem root `/`. 

I do think mentioning how the entire filesystem is all one big tree at around this point in the docs is good, so maybe add a bit explicitly explaining that `~` actually is short for `/home/your_user_name` and that the _actual_ root from which everything descends is `/`. Especially since later in this tutorial we see `/home/ubuntu` in place of `~` in things like the output `pwd` and get a fuller explanation of the whole structure later.

Author: I think I might just defer discussions about root until after the FHS section (probably in tutorial part 2). On reflection, using root in the colloquial way I hear and see people using it is probably the wrong decision for a tutorial this basic. I've added the clarifications you suggested, but removed references to root here.

Let's illustrate how this works by moving around a bit more. Start by making a subdirectory:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~/my-folder
mkdir second-level
```

> Another helpful feature of the command line is "tab completion". If a command, directory, or file already exists, we can start typing it and then press the {kbd}`TAB` key on the keyboard to complete it. Let's navigate to the directory we just made by typing `cd s`, and then press {kbd}`TAB`. The CLI automatically fills in the rest!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another helpful feature of the command line is "tab completion". If a command, directory, or file already exists, we can start typing it and then press the {kbd}`TAB` key on the keyboard to complete it. Let's navigate to the directory we just made by typing `cd s`, and then press {kbd}`TAB`. The shell automatically fills in the rest!
```

nitpick

Author: Done!

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
mv file2.txt new-folder/file2.txt
```

Both of the arguments here can take a **path**, but if we're in the same directory as the file is located in, we don't need to specify it. This becomes really powerful when you have to handle a lot of files in subdirectories.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls

file1.txt new-folder
```

If we `cd` to our `new-folder` we can see our file has been moved with the same name. But -- what if we don't want to keep the same name? It turns out `mv` can help us with that too.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~/new-folder
mv file2.txt file2-renamed.txt
```

We can also combine both moving the file and renaming it into one command.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~/new-folder
mv file2-renamed.txt ../file2.txt
```

Then if we `cd ..` back to the home directory, and run `ls` again, we'll see that our file has been moved back:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls

file1.txt file2.txt new-folder
```

So what if we want more copies of the same file, but in our `new-folder`?

> For that, we can use `cp` again, but give the directory as the destination:

Reviewer: maybe mention that the terminal will not check for name collisions and just gleefully overwrite files here?

Author: Good idea, also including "gleefully" because I like anthropomorphising machines

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
cp file1.txt new-folder/
```

Double check with `ls` and `cd` that this has worked. You should now have `file1.txt` in both the home directory, and in `new-folder`.

The `cp` command is not just for files. We can make backup copies of a whole directory (and all its contents) using the `-a` (or `--archive`) flag. This flag preserves all the file permissions:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
cp -a new-folder/ new-folder-backup/
```

Take a look around your `new-folder-backup` directory to make sure it all matches the original, then `cd ..` back to the home directory.

Let's say we no longer want `file.txt`. We can use the `rm` command to remove it, the way we did before. This time, we don't need the `-r` flag because we're deleting a single file.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
rm file1.txt
```

```{warning}
Remember, there is no recycle bin in the Linux terminal -- once you `rm` a file, it is gone. On your real system, double-check what you are deleting before running this command.
```

> ## Understanding file types

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Understanding attributes of a file
```

a file type is something else like is it a graphic or sound file

In Linux, everything is represented as a file -- including directories, devices, and network connections. When we use `ls -l`, the very first character of each line tells us what type of file it is.

Let's look at a few examples:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls -l

-rw-rw-r-- 1 ubuntu ubuntu    0 Apr 21 17:46 file2.txt
drwxrwxr-x 2 ubuntu ubuntu 4096 Apr 21 18:00 new-folder
drwxrwxr-x 2 ubuntu ubuntu 4096 Apr 21 18:00 new-folder-backup
```

The output looks quite complicated at first, so let's break it down using the first row of the output.

| Column         | What it is  | Description |
| ---            | ---         | --- |
| `-rw-rw-r--`   | Permissions | The type of file and who can read/write/execute it |

> | `1`            | Links       | The number of hard links to the file or directory |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `1`            | Links       | How many distinct filesystem paths refer to this file or directory (these are called "hard links") |
```

Author: adopted, you're right - I should have added a definition for that

This method uses a three-digit number where each digit is calculated by adding: read (4) + write (2) + execute (1):

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
touch numeric-test.sh
```
```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls -l numeric-test.sh

-rw-rw-r-- 1 ubuntu ubuntu 0 Apr 23 15:58 numeric-test.sh
```

Then let's use the numeric notation to change the permissions:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
chmod 755 numeric-test.sh
```

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls -l numeric-test.sh

-rwxr-xr-x 1 ubuntu ubuntu 0 Apr 23 15:58 numeric-test.sh
```

From this we can see that `755` means: the owner has read, write and execute (7) privileges, the group has read and execute (5), while all others have read and execute (5).

Some common permission combinations:

| Number | Symbolic | Meaning |
|--------|----------|---------|
| `644` | `rw-r--r--` | Owner can read/write; others can only read. Suitable for most files. |
| `755` | `rwxr-xr-x` | Owner can do everything; others can read and execute. Suitable for scripts and directories. |
| `700` | `rwx------` | Only the owner has any access. |

> | `600` | `rw-------` | Owner can read/write; no one else has any access. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `600` | `rw-------` | Owner can read/write; no one else has any access. |
| `777` | `rwxrwxrwx` | Full access to everyone. **This is a dangerous permission to grant**, but might occasionally be useful for debugging permission-related problems or on temporary files. |
```

People really shouldn't use 777 unless they know what they're doing, but I think it deserves a mention if only to say "please don't use this one unless you know what you're doing, and if you see it you should probably change it"

Author: Nice, added!

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
sudo apt update
```

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
sudo apt upgrade
```

When we run a `sudo` command, we are asked for our password to confirm it is us.

The `sudo` group on Ubuntu is special: any user account added to it gains the ability to run commands with admin privileges. Groups are listed in `/etc/group`, and a user can belong to many groups at once. We can inspect who is in the `sudo` group with:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
grep sudo /etc/group

sudo:x:27:ubuntu
```

Each line of the `/etc/group` file follows this format:

```text
group_name:password:GID:user_list
```

Where: 
* `group_name` is the human-readable name of the group (what you see when you run `ls -l`)
* `password` is always shown as `x` in modern Linux systems - the actual (encrypted) group password is stored in the secure `/etc/passwd` file.
* `GID` is the group ID, which is a unique numerical integer assigned to the group.
* `user_list` is a comma-separated list of usernames that are members of the group.

## The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard

> Now that we know how to move around the filesystem, it's worth understanding how it is organised. Linux follows the **Filesystem Hierarchy Standard** (FHS), which defines where different types of files and directories belong. This is maintained by the Linux Foundation, and it means the structure of any Linux system is predictable and consistent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we know how to move around the filesystem, it's worth understanding how it is organised. Most Linux distributions, including Ubuntu, follow the **Filesystem Hierarchy Standard** (FHS), which defines where different types of files and directories belong. This is maintained by the Linux Foundation, and it means the structure of any conforming system is predictable and consistent.
```

Maximal pedantry: Not _every_ Linux system is FHS compliant (hi, NixOS!)

Author: I'm not averse to a little light pedantry :D added

(also, I never played with Nix so I didn't know that, thanks for the info!)

All files and directories live under the **root directory**, represented by a single forward slash `/`. Even files stored on separate physical disks appear as part of this single tree.

Let's take a look at the top level:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls /

bin   dev   home  lib64   media  opt   root  sbin  srv  tmp  usr  var
boot  etc   lib   mnt    proc  run   snap  sys
```

Here is what the most important directories contain:

| Directory | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|

> | `/bin` and `/sbin` | Essential command binaries (e.g., `ls`, `cp`, `mv`) and system binaries (e.g. `iptables`, `reboot`) respectively |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `/bin` | Essential command binaries (e.g. `ls`, `cp`, `mv`)
| `/sbin` | System binaries (e.g `iptables`, `reboot`)
```

Author: Sometimes I'm a bit overzealous in my desire to tidy things up lol

| `/boot` | Static files needed to boot the system, including the Linux kernel and bootloader files |
| `/dev` | Device files (e.g. `/dev/sda` and `/dev/null`) |
| `/etc` | System configuration files (e.g. `/etc/group` and `/etc/password`) |
| `/home` | User home directories (optional, but standard) |
| `/lib` | Essential shared libraries (needed by the binaries in `/bin` and `/sbin`) |

> | `/media` and `/mnt` | Temporary mount points for removable media (like USBs and CDs) and for manually mounting filesystems (respectively) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
| `/media` | Mount points for temporarily mounted removable media (like USBs or CDs)
| `/mnt` | Mount points for manually mounted filesystems (kept seperate to avoid clashes)
```

Author: Added this too, thanks

Let's try reading the man page for `man` itself:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
man man
```

The Linux manual is divided into numbered sections -- the number appears in the page title, e.g., `LS(1)`. Section 1 means "executable programs and shell commands". We can search within a man page by pressing {kbd}`/` followed by a search term, then {kbd}`Enter`.

Manual pages are also rendered online and can be [viewed in your browser](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/). 

### Quick help with --help

Most commands also accept a `--help` flag that prints a brief summary of the available options:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
ls --help
```

This is often quicker than opening the full manual page when we just want to check a specific flag.

### Searching for a command

If we know what we want to do but don't know which command to use, `man -k` searches the man page descriptions for a keyword:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:user: ubuntu
:host: tutorial
:dir: ~
man -k copy
```

This lists every command whose description mentions "copy", which can help us find the right tool for the job.

> ## Next steps

Reviewer 2: Will there be a second one which includes the next obvious things (if not could it go here please)?
- redirecting output and input `<` and `>`
- using pipes to connect stdin/stdout
- starting things in background, + `&`, `bg`/`fg`
- use of sub-shells `cmd1 $(cmd2 | xargs)` 
- advances redirecting output and input `<<< heredocs` and `2>&1 >/dev/null` and such

Author: That's all in part 2 :)
